Review
Review and evaluation of hydrogen production options for better
environment
Canan Acara,*, Ibrahim Dincerb,c
aFaculty of Engineering and Natural Sciences, Bahcesehir University, Ç ıra/C21gan Caddesi No: 4 e6, 34353, Bes ¸ iktas ¸ , Istanbul, Turkey
bFaculty of Engineering and Applied Science, University of Ontario Institute of Technology, 2000 Simcoe Street North, Oshawa, Ontario, L1H 7K4, Cana da
cFaculty of Mechanical Engineering, Yildiz Technical University, Besiktas, Istanbul, Turkey
article info
Article history:
Received 23 October 2018Received in revised form1 February 2019Accepted 4 February 2019Available online 5 February 2019
Keywords:
Hydrogen productionHydrogen economySustainability
Energy
Sourcesabstract
In this study, different hydrogen production sources and systems and some hydrogen storage options are
comparatively investigated in detail. Economic, environmental, social, and technical performance andreliability of the selected options are compared in detail. Biomass, geothermal, hydro, nuclear, solar, and
wind are the selected hydrogen production sources; biological, thermal, photonic, and electrical are the
selected hydrogen production methods; and chemical hydrides, compressed gas, cryogenic liquid, metalhydrides, and nanomaterials are the selected hydrogen storage systems. In addition, some case studies
and basic research needs to enhance the performance of hydrogen energy systems and to tackle the
major challenges of the hydrogen economy are provided. The results show that solar has the highestenvironmental performance (8/10) and the total average ranking (7.40/10), nuclear has the lowestenvironmental performance (3/10), and geothermal has the lowest total average ranking (4/10/10)
among selected hydrogen production sources. Hydrogen production systems ’comparison indicates that
photonic options have the highest environmental performance ranking (8/10), thermal options have thelowest environmental performance ranking (5/10), electrical options have the highest average ranking
(7.60/10), and biological options have the lowest average ranking (4.80/10).
©2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Contents
1. Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ................................................ 8 3 5
2. 3S approach to hydrogen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ................................................ 8 3 7
3. Review methodology of hydrogen options . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ................................... 8 3 8
4. Sustainability analysis of hydrogen production options . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ................................... 8 3 9
5. Results and discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ................................................ 8 4 1
6. Future Directions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ................................................ 8 4 5
7. Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ................................................ 8 4 7
References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .......................8 4 7
1. Introduction
Hydrogen has the potential to provide economically feasible,
ﬁnancially promising, and socially advantageous, and energeticallyefﬁcient solutions to issues related to the ever-increasing global
energy demand, including global warming ( Dutta, 2014 ). In addi-
tion, the recent studies show that it will be inevitable to initiate and
accelerate the energy transition from traditional energy systems to
innovative and sustainable alternatives ( Shaﬁei et al., 2017 ).
Hydrogen is the fundamental pillar of the energy transition
critically needed to combat global warming and other issues related
to traditional energy systems ( Zhang et al., 2016 ). As can be seen*Corresponding author.
E-mail address: Canan.Acar@eng.bau.edu.tr (C. Acar).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Journal of Cleaner Production
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jclepro
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2019.02.046
0959-6526/ ©2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.Journal of Cleaner Production 218 (2019) 835 e849
from Fig. 1 , hydrogen systems could potentially have eight signi ﬁ-
cant roles during this energy transition ( Dincer and Acar, 2016 ):
/C15Large-scale renewable energy integration to the existing energy
infrastructure
/C15Accessible, reliable, safe, clean and affordable energy to all
sectors and regions
/C15Highly resilient energy systems
/C15Integration to multigeneration systems to offer many valuable
products with minimal losses
/C15Cleaner transportation via fuel cells and hydrogen-fueled in-
ternal combustion engines
/C15Cleaner energy source to the industry, residential applications,
buildings, etc.
/C15Cleaner heating, cooling, drying, and power to all end users of
the energy sector
/C15Cleaner industrial feedstock
Hydrogen has the potential to provide clean, ef ﬁcient, reliable,
and affordable solutions in all these application ﬁelds with signif-
icant social bene ﬁts (Kalinci et al., 2015 ). In the literature, it is re-
ported that hydrogen can enable wide use and full market
penetration of renewable energy sources ( Singh et al., 2016 ). On the
end-user (service) side hydrogen is a critical complement to elec-
tricity to store intermittent renewables which is a great step to-
wards greenization of the energy systems ( Cipriani et al., 2014 ).
In the literature, it is reported that hydrogen could meet 18% of
theﬁnal energy demand, reduce 6 Gt of CO 2emissions annually,
and create 30 million new jobs by 2050 ( Uyar and Besikci, 2017 ).
The literature also shows that hydrogen could power over 400
million cars, 15 e20 million trucks, and around 5 million buses in
2050, which make up about 20 e25% of the transportation industry
(Mostafaeipour et al., 2016 ). Along with its signi ﬁcant economic
and environmental bene ﬁts, hydrogen energy systems are expected
to operate at higher ef ﬁciencies in the future ( Nakamura et al.,
2015 ). The literature shows that hydrogen is seen as the key to
sustainable growth and solution to global warming issues
(Gonz /C19alez et al., 2015 ).
Hydrogen has another advantage which is the ability to be built
on the existing natural gas infrastructure in buildings ( Gong et al.,
2016 ). The literature shows that hydrogen could possibly meet
about 10% of the global building heating demand by 2050 ( Valente
et al., 2018 ). Another advantage of hydrogen is the ef ﬁcient use of
medium and high-temperature heat processes in the industry
(Maroufmashat et al., 2016 ). In these processes, electricity is not a
very effective solution so hydrogen could be the perfect solution
(Sgobbi et al., 2016 ). Furthermore, hydrogen production methods
are getting more ef ﬁcient, affordable, and environmentally friendly
and less fossil fuel dependent as the innovative hydrogenproduction pathways and systems are developed ( Salvi and
Subramanian, 2015 ). In addition to being a sustainable energy
storage medium and heating/cooling source, hydrogen is a valuable
industrial chemical feedstock used mainly in methanol, ammonia,
and steel production processes ( Acar and Dincer, 2014 ).
Accomplishing a fully developed hydrogen economy requires
well-established hydrogen energy systems from better resources,
production methods, end use options (3S approach) including the
storage and distribution of hydrogen ( Dincer and Acar, 2015a ). A
fully developed hydrogen economy is essential to combat global
warming and critical for a sustainable future with signi ﬁcant
environmental, economic, and societal bene ﬁts (G€ollei et al., 2016 ).
Hydrogen does not only eliminate greenhouse gas emissions, but it
can also eliminate other emissions which damage the environment
and cause global warming ( Sarrias-Mena et al., 2015 ). These
emissions are sulfur oxides, nitrogen oxides, and particulates
causing smog ( Owierkowicz and Malinowska, 2017 ). Hydrogen can
also minimize noise pollution by replacing fossil fuel combustion
processes in the transportation sector, in buildings, and in the in-
dustry ( Marchenko and Solomin, 2015 ). Furthermore, energy se-
curity can be accomplished with hydrogen economy by takingadvantage of domestic, locally available, reliable, and secure energy
and material sources for hydrogen production, distribution, storage,
and end-use ( De Santoli et al., 2017 ).
In order to accomplish a fully developed hydrogen economy and
to make hydrogen a critical component for the energy market,
signiﬁcant research and investment are required on hydrogen
production systems ( Chintala and Subramanian, 2015 ). The goal is
to make hydrogen production systems more ef ﬁcient, affordable,
reliable, safe, and ready for different types of end-user needs such
as small/large scale, portable/stationary, etc. As the current
hydrogen production systems use already available technologies,
the need is to set up a well-developed hydrogen infrastructure
(Joshi et al., 2016 ). This can be achieved by increasing hydrogen
production systems ’capacities and subsequently reducing costs
which would lead to wide acceptance by the public, industry, and
the governments.
In the transportation sector, hydrogen-fueled internal combus-
tion engines and fuel cells can possibly be used together with
battery electric vehicles to reach the true greenization of all land,
air, and water transportation ( Maleki et al., 2016 ). Fuel cell vehicles
are also reported to have some advantages over battery electric
vehicles such as lower investment costs and quicker fueling and
refueling. In addition to transportation, signi ﬁcant quantities of
hydrogen are utilized as feedstock during methanol re ﬁning and
production, ammonia synthesis, and iron and steel industry. Pro-
ducing hydrogen from clean and sustainable sources could have a
direct impact on the greenization of these industries as well
(Mehrpooya et al., 2017 ). Hydrogen can also provide heating,
cooling, and power to buildings by using the existing natural gas
infrastructure. The literature estimates that in the near future, there
might be entire cities converting to solely hydrogen based heating
and cooling ( Gao et al., 2017 ). Last but not least, hydrogen can also
become a crucial renewable energy storage medium and if neces-
sary can be used for clean electricity production. With hydrogen, it
is possible to store and transport renewable energies effectivelyover long distances and time periods ( Beheshti et al., 2016 ). For that
reason, hydrogen is a fundamental component during the transi-
tion to 100% renewable energy systems to eliminate global
warming.
In this study, a thorough evaluation of the long-term potential of
hydrogen production systems to combat global warming is pre-
sented along with a roadmap to tackle the signi ﬁcant challenges
and threats to a well-developed hydrogen economy. Hydrogen
production systems have the potential to greenize all end users ofRenewable 
energy 
integration• Flexible systems
• Increased accessibility
• Enhanced resilience
• Multigenerational options
• Reduced monopoly
• Improved efficiency
Decarbonization 
of energy 
systems• Cleaner transportation
• Cleaner industrial processes
• Cleaner outputs to meet the needs
• Renewable feedstock to all sectors
• Reduced environmental impact
• Increased sustainability
Fig. 1. Hydrogen's critical roles during the energy transition to combat global
warming.C. Acar, I. Dincer / Journal of Cleaner Production 218 (2019) 835 e849 836
the energy sector such as transportation, industry, buildings and so
on and hydrogen can make well-developed renewable energy
systems a practical option for all end users of the energy sector. For
this reason, this study intends to use the 3S (Source-System-Ser-
vice) approach to hydrogen production systems and aims to discuss
the sustainability of novel hydrogen production, storage, distribu-
tion, and end use options. In the open literature, there is a limited
number of studies comparatively assessing different hydrogen
production sources and systems and hydrogen storage options by
using different technical, social, environmental, and economic
criteria. This study is to ﬁrst to provide a broader assessment
perspective to all three aspects of hydrogen options: (i) hydrogen
production sources, (ii) hydrogen production systems, and (iii)
hydrogen storage systems by using 17 different perspective criteria
to comparatively assess their economic, environmental, social, and
technical performance as well as reliability. Another critical goal of
this study is to provide a guide to the industry, academia, and the
governments to combat global warming with the help of hydrogen
production systems. Therefore, in the end, key research needs and
directions and transition steps toward a fully developed hydrogen
economy is provided.
2. 3S approach to hydrogen
In this section, a 3S approach introduced by Dincer and Acar
(2015a) is applied to hydrogen energy systems. For a truly sus-
tainable approach to combat global warming, hydrogen energy
systems must be considered from source including all energy and
material sources to a system including hydrogen production, stor-
age, and distribution systems and ﬁnally to service including
different end-use options such as fuel cells, internal combustion
engines, and so on ( Walker et al., 2016 ). This approach is depicted in
Fig. 2 .
By using the approach provided in Fig. 2 , the potential of
hydrogen energy systems to combat global warming is evaluated
and thoroughly discussed. In this study, hydrogen energy systems
are considered as the key to sustainability and hydrogen is also
considered a versatile fuel with practical advantages for a broadvariety of end-use applications such as transportation, industrial
processes, residential applications, buildings, etc. When consid-
ering hydrogen in future energy systems, a realistic approach is
taken into account. The approach used in this study does not
consider ﬁctional solutions in imaginary case studies. Instead, this
study only considers the existing systems both in large and small
scales, their scalability, potentials, strengths, weaknesses, research
challenges and needs, and possible future directions.
In this study, the aim is to identify and discuss hydrogen's role in
energy systems to combat global warming. For this reason, aroadmap is presented to achieve fully developed and deployed
hydrogen energy systems. In addition, within the scope of the 3S
approach; the necessary short-, medium-, and long-term mile-
stones are discussed and investment requirements for wide-
deployment of hydrogen energy systems are identi ﬁed for
hydrogen production, storage, delivery, and end use systems for a
sustainable future.
Eliminating the negative impacts of global warming is essential
for a sustainable future ( Creutzig, 2016 ). In hydrogen energy sys-
tems, the ﬁrst point to look at should be the source selection
(Sharma and Ghoshal, 2015 ). In order to be truly sustainable and
environmentally benign, hydrogen should be produced from clean,
abundant, reliable, and affordable energy and material sources
(Hosseini et al., 2015 ). In cases where the source is not continuous, a
well-developed storage system must be integrated into the
hydrogen production network ( Sethia and Sayari, 2016 ). Renew-
ables seem to be the most advantageous sources for hydrogen
production systems ( Shaner et al., 2016 ). However, most of the
renewables are not available in large scale energy systems due to
cost issues, therefore, more traditional systems (i.e., fossil fuel
powered processes) can be used for hydrogen production withproper carbon capture and emissions control during the initial part
of the transition to a well-developed hydrogen economy ( Gradisher
et al., 2015 ). In the course of this period, advancements in material
sciences and technology are expected to lower the cost, enhance
the ef ﬁciency and enable the possibility of large-scale operations
for renewable-based hydrogen energy systems ( Nastasi and Basso,
2016 ). When affordable, reliable, clean, and ef ﬁcient renewable-
based hydrogen systems are available on larger scales, there will
be a faster transition from fossil fuels to renewables for better
sustainability ( Shaﬁei et al., 2015 ).
Selecting the most suitable energy and material sources is
essential in hydrogen energy systems ( Yilmaz et al., 2016 ). How-
ever, if not accompanied by the proper system(s), it might not be
possible to get the most optimum outcome from the selected
source(s) ( Bundhoo and Mohee, 2016 ). In hydrogen energy systems,
the “system ”step should be ef ﬁcient, clean, reliable, safe, available
in small and large scales, and applicable to portable and stationary
systems ( Asghar et al., 2015 ). The “system ”step can be divided into
three categories for hydrogen energy: hydrogen production sys-
tems, hydrogen storage systems, and hydrogen delivery (distribu-
tion) systems ( Sinigaglia et al., 2017 ). Hydrogen production systems
can be classi ﬁed by the use of primary energy type; biological,
electrical, electrochemical, electrothermal, photochemical, photo-
electrochemical, photonic, thermal, and thermochemical are some
of the most commonly used alternatives in the literature ( Dincer
and Acar, 2015b ). It should be noted that there could be addi-
tional novel options in the future depending on the advancements
in material science and technology ( Choi et al., 2015 ). Hydrogen
delivery systems connect end users and hydrogen production sys-
tems ( Demir and Dincer, 2018 ). The most commonly used hydrogen
delivery options are storage tanks, pipelines, and vessels ( Singh
et al., 2015 ). The expectation from these systems can be listed as
the ability to support varying demand, applicability to both small
and large scales, reliability, safety, and zero or minimal losses
(Ogden et al., 2018 ). In hydrogen storage systems, compressed gas,
cryogenic liquid, and metal hydrides are the most commonly used
options ( Aneke and Wang, 2016 ). In addition, depending on the
advancements in materials science and technology, novel hydrogen
storage options can be introduced in the future ( Liu et al., 2016 ). The
key expectations from hydrogen storage systems can be listed as
(Chanchetti et al., 2016 ):
/C15high gravimetric and volumetric energy density
/C15high power outputSource• Renewables (e.g., solar, wind, hydro, etc.)
• Nuclear• Fossil fuels
System• Hydrogen production systems
• Electrical, thermal, photonic, hybrid, etc .
• Hydrogen storage systems
• Gas, liquid, metal hydrides, etc.
• Hydrogen delivery systems
Service• Power
• Heating
• Cooling• Fresh water
• F
uels
Fig. 2. 3S approach to hydrogen energy systems.C. Acar, I. Dincer / Journal of Cleaner Production 218 (2019) 835 e849 837
/C15low energy and power cost
/C15zero or minimal emissions and waste
/C15safe operation
/C15accessibility
/C15ease of use
/C15efﬁcient operation
/C15low-performance degradation
/C15long lifetime
/C15minimal or zero loss during charging/storage/discharging
Hydrogen has a very wide range of applications that could be
beneﬁted by different end-user types which are considered as the
service step of the hydrogen energy systems. The service step of
hydrogen energy systems can be grouped based on the end user
types such as an energy source for transportation ( Ahmed et al.,
2016 ), industry ( Otto et al., 2017 ), residential applications ( Maleki
et al., 2017 ), power generation ( Prananto et al., 2017 ), and heating
(Dodds et al., 2015 ) and cooling ( Khani et al., 2016 ) purposes. In
addition, hydrogen can be used as a material feedstock in industrial
processes, for instance in ammonia ( Bicer et al., 2016 ) and meth-
anol production processes ( Bellotti et al., 2017 ) and in the steel
industry ( Rao et al., 2019 ).
Currently, the transportation industry relies almost completely
on fossil fuels, and as a result, the transportation sector contributes
to more than 20% of the global CO 2emissions ( Van Fan et al., 2018 ).
If it is not greenized, the transportation sector's share on global CO 2
emissions is expected to increase in the future with the increase inglobal population and mobility ( Creutzig et al., 2015 ). Hydrogen
produced, stored, and distributed by following the 3S approach in a
sustainable manner could signi ﬁcantly lower the emissions of the
transportation sector ( Siyal et al., 2015 ). The expectations from
hydrogen energy systems in the transportation sector can be listed
as a long driving range, ﬂexible operation, and high performance
(Moliner et al., 2016 ). Hydrogen can be used in fuel cells and in-
ternal combustion engines to meet the energy demands of the
transportation industry in a sustainable manner ( Maniatopoulos
et al., 2015 ).
The industry is the second largest energy consumer, following
the power sector. Currently, the industry contributes to more than
30% of the global ﬁnal energy consumption ( Fais et al., 2016 ). Due to
the heavy reliance on fossil fuels, the industrial energy consump-
tion contributes to around 25% of the global CO
2emissions ( Schandl
et al., 2016 ). The ﬁve industries with the highest energy con-
sumption from the highest to lowest consumption are iron and
steel (28% of the industrial energy consumption), chemicals, pet-
rochemicals, and re ﬁning (14% of the industrial energy consump-
tion), cement (8% of the industrial energy consumption), aluminum
(5% of the industrial energy consumption), and pulp and paper (5%
of the industrial energy consumption) industries ( Sorrell, 2015 ). A
major reason behind this high energy demand of these industries is
their high-grade heat requirement ( Schulze et al., 2016 ). In these
industries, hydrogen could be a lot more affordable, clean, and
efﬁcient energy option than using fossil fuels or electricity to
generate high-grade heat ( Bakenne et al., 2016 ).
The energy demand of both residential and commercial build-
ings are very high due to their heating, cooling, and power re-
quirements ( Reinhart and Davila, 2016 ). Some major energy
consuming processes in buildings are space heating and cooling,
hot water, lighting, appliances, and so on ( Yarbrough et al., 2015 ).
The energy demand of buildings is a lot higher than the trans-
portation sector and almost as high as the energy demand of the
industry in total ( Arteconi et al., 2017 ). This high energy demand is
mainly met by fossil fuels which is a reason behind the negative
impact of buildings on global warming ( Delmastro et al., 2017 ). To
tackle this issue, buildings must be greenized with highly ef ﬁcientenergy systems ( Frayssinet et al., 2018 ). Greenization of buildings
can be accomplished via waste heat recovery (i.e., district heating/
cooling combined with traditional power plants), heat pumps, and
transitioning to hydrogen energy ( Wong et al., 2015 ). Hydrogen has
the advantage to be easily integrated into the existing natural gas
network with minimal modi ﬁcation ( Alanne and Cao, 2017 ).
Hydrogen can effectively provide heating, cooling, power, drying,
and fresh water to the buildings in a safe, reliable, and affordable
manner ( Nastasi and Di Matteo, 2017 ).
In addition to their signi ﬁcant energy consumption, chemical
and petrochemical industries are using large quantities of hydrogen
as an industrial feedstock ( Ball and Weeda, 2015 ). Among these
industries, ammonia production for urea and other fertilizers is the
largest consumer of hydrogen making about 51% of the total in-
dustrial hydrogen demand ( Kuntke et al., 2017 ). Second highest
hydrogen consumer as industrial feedstock is the re ﬁning industry
where hydrogen is used for hydrocracking and hydrotreating such
as desulfurization which makes around 31% of the total industrial
hydrogen demand ( Speight, 2016 ). When combined together,
ammonia and re ﬁning industries consume more about 82% of the
total industrial hydrogen demand ( Setoyama et al., 2017 ). The
remaining consumers of hydrogen as an industrial feedstock are
methanol production, fuel processing, glass production, and so on
(Hanley et al., 2018 ). With the global population increase and rising
standards of living the demand for hydrogen as industrial feedstock
is expected to keep increasing as well ( Simon et al., 2015 ). There-
fore, it is essential for the industry that the hydrogen supply comes
from clean sources to reduce the negative impact of the industry on
global warming ( Liu et al., 2015 ). Further greenization of the in-
dustry could be achieved by substituting carbon with hydrogen as a
reductant in steel production ( Karakaya et al., 2018 ). In addition,
hydrogen could be used to capture the industrial byproduct CO 2
into commercially viable products such as methanol ( Liu and Liu,
2015 ). Hydrogen's role as an enabler of carbon recycling in the in-
dustry is shown in Fig. 3 .
3. Review methodology of hydrogen options
In this study, recent data from the literature on the environ-
mental, economic, social, and technical performance of hydrogen
production sources and systems as well as hydrogen storage
Carbon utilization
Product (e.g., 
methanol)
Use of excess CO 2
as an input in 
other industriesTransfer of 
excess CO 2 to 
carbon capture 
systemsCarbon capture 
and storage
Fig. 3. Hydrogen's role as an enabler of carbon recycling in the industry.C. Acar, I. Dincer / Journal of Cleaner Production 218 (2019) 835 e849 838
options are reviewed and comparatively evaluated. Here, the
studies are selected ﬁrstly based on their publication year: more
speci ﬁcally, the studies published before 2015 are not taken into
review process as the aim is to evaluate the most recent data in the
literature. ScienceDirect database is used during the review process
and the content of publications are categorized based on the
following criteria:
/C15Studies focusing on hydrogen production
o Studies evaluating hydrogen production sources
o Studies evaluating hydrogen production systems
/C15Studies focusing on hydrogen storage systems
These studies are further classi ﬁed and selected based on their
evaluation criteria. In this study, publications focusing on one or
more of the following criteria when evaluating hydrogen produc-
tion and storage options are selected for sustainability analysis.
These criteria are:
/C15Economic performance
o Initial cost (USD/kg H 2)
o Running cost (USD/kg H 2)
/C15Environmental performance
o GHG emissions (kg CO 2eq./kg H 2)
o Land use (m2land requirement/kg H 2)
o Water discharge quality
o Solid waste generation (kg solid waste/kg H 2)
/C15Social performance
o Impact on public health
o Employment opportunities
o Training opportunities
o Public acceptance
/C15Technical performance
o Energy ef ﬁciency (%)
o Exergy ef ﬁciency (%)
o Process control
o Raw material input (kg raw material/kg H 2)
/C15Reliability
o Dependence on imported resources
o Predictability
o Scalability
Detailed information on the selected criteria and how they affect
the overall sustainability analysis of the selected hydrogen options
are given in the next section. Here, the most recent data found in
the literature are provided along with their scope and key ﬁndings
(Table 1 ). When selecting the data from the literature, ﬁrst
“hydrogen production ”keyword is used in ScienceDirect and all
review articles are retrieved, resulting 39,081 published articles.
After ﬁltering the studies published before 2015, the remaining
studies (14,253) are narrowed down by using classi ﬁcation criteria
as “energy ”and “sustainability ”. For comparison purposes, the
studies which comparatively assess at least four different hydrogen
production sources or systems by using at least four different
criteria are selected. In addition, the studies which do not explain
the evaluation procedure or cite the sources of any previouslypublished results are eliminated. The literature review process has
led to four sources which are presented in Table 1 based on their
selected hydrogen production sources and systems and perfor-
mance criteria.
Table 2 shows the selected hydrogen storage studies along with
their scope and performance evaluation criteria. Here, “hydrogen
storage ”keyword is used in ScienceDirect and the results arerestricted to review articles, and 18,157 results are retrieved. Next,
the articles published before 2015 are eliminated and as a result,
the number of articles is lowered to 7510. In the next step, “energy ”
and “sustainability ”keywords are used to further narrow down the
results and the remaining articles are scanned through to select the
studies with useful data on at least ﬁve different hydrogen storage
options which are comparatively assessed by using at least ﬁve
different performance criteria. Furthermore, the studies which do
not describe the assessment methodology clearly or cite the sour-
ces of any previously published results are not taken into account.
As a result of this process, six literature sources are selected which
are listed in Table 2 based on their evaluated hydrogen storage
systems and performance criteria.
4. Sustainability analysis of hydrogen production options
In this study, economic, social, environmental, and technical
performance and reliability of hydrogen production sources and
systems and hydrogen storage options are comparatively assessed.
The selected options are shown in Fig. 4 .
In economic performance evaluation criteria, initial and running
costs are taken into account. The initial cost is the capital cost
requirement which is comparatively assessed in the literature
based on USD/kg hydrogen. The running cost includes operation
and maintenance costs which are also given in terms of USD/kg
hydrogen. The overall economic performance ranking is calculated
by taking the average of initial and running cost rankings.
The environmental performance comparison is conducted
based on GHG emissions, land use, water discharge quality, andsolid waste generation. GHG emissions are given in terms of kg CO
2
eq./kg hydrogen production and land use is the amount of land arearequired to produce or store hydrogen (m
2land requirement/kg
hydrogen). Water discharge quality is ranked by experts in the
literature within a range of 0 e10.0 means low quality which in-
dicates the selected option has polluted water discharge or the
discharge water is too hot or too cold which disturbs the ecosystem.
On the other hand, 10 means the best option with clean water
discharge at closer temperatures to the environmental state. Solid
waste generation is given in terms of kg solid waste generated/kg
hydrogen production. The overall environmental performance
ranking is calculated by taking the average of GHG emissions, land
use, water discharge quality, and solid waste generation rankings.
The literature data used in this study are taken from the references
mentioned in Tables 1 and 2 .
Impact on public health, employment and training opportu-
nities and public acceptance are the social performance criteria.
These social performance criteria are ranked by experts in the
literature. The social performance criteria rankings are also pro-
vided in the 0 e10 range where 0 indicates a high negative impact
on public health, or no employment or training opportunities or no
public acceptance. On the contrary,10 means no negative impact on
public health, or vast employment or training opportunities or full
public acceptance. The overall social performance ranking is
calculated by taking the average of impact on public health,
employment opportunities, training opportunities, and public
acceptance rankings.
In technical performance criteria, energy and exergy ef ﬁciencies,
process control, and raw material input data are taken into account
by using the numerical results and expert performance evaluations
provided in the literature. Energy ef ﬁciency rankings are between
0 and 10 and the evaluation is done based on the following
equation:C. Acar, I. Dincer / Journal of Cleaner Production 218 (2019) 835 e849 839
Energy efficiency ranking ¼Energy content of the desired product
Energy content of the input
/C210
(1)
Similarly, exergy ef ﬁciency rankings are between 0 and 10 and
the calculations are done as shown in the equation below:
Exergy efficiency ranking ¼Exergy content of the desired product
Exergy content of the input
/C210
(2)
Process control rankings of the experts use the 0 e10 scale as
well, 0 meaning hardest process control and 10 indicating easiest
process control. Raw material input includes any material
requirement of the selected option from clean water to catalysts,
biomass etc. The unit of raw material input is kg raw material input/kg hydrogen production. The overall technical performance ranking
is calculated by taking the average of energy ef ﬁciency, exergy ef-
ﬁciency, process control, and raw material input rankings.
Dependence on imported resources, predictability, and scal-
ability are the availability and reliability criteria. These selected
performance indicators are ranked by experts in the literature.
Similarly, rankings are also provided in 0 e10 range where 0 in-
dicates sole dependence on imported resources or no predictability
or no scaling options. On the other hand, 10 means no dependence
on imported resources or extensive predictability or numerous
available scaling options. The overall availability and reliability
ranking is calculated by taking the average of dependence on im-
ported resources, predictability, and scalability rankings.
In this study, the data from the literature are taken as a basis.
Water discharge quality, impact on public health, employment and
training opportunities, public acceptance, and process control,
dependence on imported resources, predictability, and scalability
are already ranked within 0 e10 scale by experts in the literature.
The data for the remaining categories are taken from the literatureTable 1
Selected data sources from the recent literature used in the sustainability analysis of hydrogen production options in this study.
Source Hydrogen
Production SourcesHydrogen Production
SystemsPerformance Criteria Notes
Hosseini and Wahid
(2016)Wind
SolarHydroGeothermalNuclear
Natural gas
BiomassCoalOilElectrolysis
ReformingGasiﬁcation
Partial oxidationFermentation
Pyrolysis
ThermochemicalcyclesCost (initial and running)
Efﬁciency (energy and
exergy)MaturityPredictability
Scalability
Dependence on importedsourcesRaw material inputProcess controlPublic acceptanceOverview of the state-of-the-art hydrogen production technologies using
renewable and sustainable sources
Dincer and Acar
(2017)Coal
Natural gas
Solar
WindHydroGeothermalBiomassNuclearThermolysis
Thermochemical
Photocatalysis
PhotoelectrochemicalBiophotolysisPhotofermentationArtiﬁcial
photosynthesisEmissions
Efﬁciencies (energy and
exergy)
Cost (initial and running)Renewability (raw materialuse)Staff (employment/trainingopportunities)ScalabilitySafety
Support (public acceptance)Comparative assessment of selected hydrogen production sources and
systems from the 18S point of view
Nikolaidis and
Poullikkas (2017)Nuclear
SolarWindBiomassElectrolysis
ThermochemicalPyrolysisGasiﬁcation
PhotolysisDark fermentationPhotofermentation
Thermolysis
PhotoelectrolysisProduction rate
Capacity factor (%)Cost (initial and running)EfﬁciencyTechnical and economic evaluation of different hydrogen production
sources and methods
Acar et al. (2018) Fossil fuels
WindSolarNuclearElectrolysis
ThermochemicalcyclesPhotoelectrochemicalcellsInitial and running costs
GHG emissionsLand useWater discharge qualitySolid waste generation
Impact on public health
Employment and trainingopportunitiesPublic acceptanceEnergy and exergyefﬁciencies
Process controlRaw material input
Dependence on imported
resourcesPredictabilityScalabilityComparative investigation of the sustainability of hydrogen production
systems
C. Acar, I. Dincer / Journal of Cleaner Production 218 (2019) 835 e849 840
and ranked and normalized to 0 e10 scale. For categories that are
aimed to be minimized such as initial and running costs, GHGemissions, land use, solid waste generation, and raw material input:
Ranking ¼maximum /C0dataselected option
maximum /C0minimum/C210 (3)
Here, maximum and minimum indicate the highest and lowest
initial and running costs, GHG emissions, land use, solid waste
generation, and raw material input among selected hydrogen pro-
duction sources and systems and storage options. The data selected
option stands for the initial or running cost, GHG emissions, land use,
solid waste generation, or raw material input of the selected
hydrogen production source or system or storage option. Theprocedure of normalizing energy and exergy ef ﬁciency rankings are
given in Equations (1) and (2) , respectively. The primary aim of the
sustainability assessment procedure explained in this section is to
provide a consistent and clear ranking methodology for the readers
which would effectively rank all selected options within 0 e10 scale
where 0 indicates the least desired point and 10 indicates the ideal
scenario in terms of sustainability.
5. Results and discussion
In this section, economic, environmental, social, and technical
performance and reliability of hydrogen production sources and
systems, storage and end-use technologies are comparatively
assessed based on the recent ﬁndings in the literature. In economic
performance, initial (capital) cost and running (operating and
maintenance) cost criteria are taken into account. GHG emissions,
land use, water discharge quality, and solid waste generation are
the environmental performance criteria. The indicators of social
performance are the impact on public health, employment oppor-
tunities, training opportunities, and public acceptance. Energy andexergy ef ﬁciencies, process control, and raw material input re-
quirements are considered in the technical performance evalua-
tion. And last, dependence on imported resources, predictability,
and scalability are the reliability criteria. The selected options are
assigned scores between 0 and 10, based on their performance. In
all cases, 0 means poor performance such as high costs, high
emissions, and land use, and more damage to the environment,
high negative impact on the society or less social bene ﬁts, low ef-
ﬁciencies, high material requirements, high dependence on im-
ported sources, less predictability, and lack of scalability. On the
other hand, 10 means ideal performance such as low costs, lowTable 2
Selected data sources from the recent literature used in the sustainability analysis of hydrogen storage options in this study.
Source Hydrogen Storage Systems Performance Criteria
Niaz et al. (2015) Compressed gas
Cryogenic liquidChemical hydridesMetal hydridesNanomaterialsInitial and running costs
Area requirement (land use)Waste generationEmployment and training opportunitiesEnergy and exergy ef ﬁciencies
Raw material input
Predictability
Zhang et al. (2015) Compressed gas
Cryogenic liquidChemical hydridesMetal hydridesNanomaterialsEmployment and training opportunities
EmissionsSafetyScalabilityAcceptability
Zhang et al. (2016) Chemical hydrides
Metal hydrides
Compressed gas
Cryogenic liquidNanomaterialsEmissions
Employment and training opportunities
Safety
Initial and running costPredictability
Reu
bet al. (2017) Chemical hydrides
Metal hydridesCompressed gasCryogenic liquidNanomaterialsEmissions
Water use and dischargeSafety (health impact)AcceptabilityProcess control
Imported resources
Scalability
Ren et al. (2017) Chemical hydrides
Metal hydridesNanomaterialsCompressed gasCryogenic liquidResource requirements
Area requirementEmployment and training opportunitiesAcceptabilityEnergy and exergy ef ﬁciencies
Nagpal and Kakkar (2018) Chemical hydrides
Metal hydrides
NanomaterialsCompressed gasCryogenic liquidImported resources
Acceptability
ControlArea requirementSafetySourcesBiomass
GeothermalHydroNuclearSolar
Wind
SystemsBiological
Electrical
Photonic
Thermal
Stora ge
Chemical hydridesCompressed gasCryogenic liquidMetal hydrides
Nanomaterials
Fig. 4. Selected hydrogen production sources and systems and storage options.C. Acar, I. Dincer / Journal of Cleaner Production 218 (2019) 835 e849 841
emissions, and land use, and less damage to the environment, low
negative impact on the society or more social bene ﬁts, high ef ﬁ-
ciencies, less material requirements, less dependence on imported
sources, high predictability, and scalability.
In the ﬁrst step, the economic, environmental, social, and
technical performance of energy sources for hydrogen production is
comparatively assessed. Selected energy sources for hydrogen are
biomass, geothermal, hydro, nuclear, solar, and wind. The perfor-
mance data of the selected sources are gathered from the sources
mentioned in Table 1 . The environmental performance ranking
results of the selected hydrogen production sources are given in
Fig. 5 and the overall performance results are presented in Fig. 6 .
The environmental performance ranking results show that in terms
of GHG emissions, the wind is the most favorable source and
biomass has the highest emissions. In terms of land use, solar re-
quires the least area and nuclear has the maximum land area re-
quirements. Solar and wind are the most favorable in the water
discharge quality category while geothermal and nuclear seem to
have the lowest water discharge qualities. In terms of solid waste
generation, nuclear has the highest solid waste and solar has the
lowest. The results show that solar has the highest average per-formance (7.40/10) as hydrogen production source, followed by
hydro and wind (6.00/10), biomass (5.80/10), nuclear (4.60/10), and
geothermal (4.60/10). Solar based hydrogen production has sig-
niﬁcant advantages since all solar-based processes are taken into
account such as photoelectrochemical cells, solar thermochemical
cycles, photobiological processes, and so on. Most of these pro-
cesses obviously have a very low negative impact on the land, air,
and water sources, highly reliable, and have high social perfor-
mances, such as the low negative impact on the public health. In
order to make solar based hydrogen production processes
competitive with traditional systems, their economic performance
must be enhanced by lowering initial and maintenance costs. Both
geothermal and hydro have some risks associated to impact on the
natural habitat and water discharge quality, and these issues reduce
their performance score. Nuclear has a solid waste risk and public
acceptance concerns and if these issues are resolved along with
lowering the costs, it can be a promising source of hydrogen pro-
duction for a sustainable future.
Fig. 5 shows that in terms of GHG emissions, among the pro-
posed options, the wind option seems to be the most environ-
mentally benign and the efforts should focus on to lower the GHGemissions of biomass. In terms of land use, solar seems to be the
best option and nuclear seems to require the largest area due to
extensive safety and control requirements such as cooling and solid
waste and pressure control. Waste discharge quality rankings show
that solar and wind have the least negative impact on clean water
reserves as opposed to geothermal and nuclear. Geothermal op-
tion's negative impact is due to the risk of polluting the under-
ground water sources. Nuclear, on the other hand, has a low
ranking because of the temperature of the wastewater coming from
cooling towers directly sent to lakes and rivers which harms the
water ecosystem. Solid waste generation category shows that solar
is the most environmentally benign option while nuclear, due to
the radioactivity of its solid waste, has the lowest ranking. When all
environmental performance criteria are taken into account, solar
seems to be the most environmentally benign option and nuclear
has the lowest environmental performance ranking. Overall, hydro
has the highest performance in the economic evaluation category
since it is a well-developed and scaled-up technology. The wind has
the lowest economic performance as hydrogen production source.
From the social and technical dimensions, the geothermal option
has the lowest rankings. both solar and wind have high socialperformance rankings since they end up with the lowest negative
impact on public health, and they are further considered to have
major new job opportunities.
Biological, electrical, photonic, and thermal hydrogen produc-
tion options are comparatively investigated to present the recent
status of the “System ”step of the hydrogen energy systems. In
Table 3 , some advantages and challenges of the selected systems
are presented. The environmental performance ranking results of
the selected hydrogen production systems are given in Fig. 7 . The
environmental performance ranking results show that in terms of
GHG emissions, photonic systems are the most favorable options. In
terms of land use, photonic and electrical hydrogen production
systems are advantageous. Photonic systems are the most favorable
in the water discharge quality category. And the overall technical,
economic, environmental, and social performances and the reli-
ability of the selected systems are presented in Fig. 8 . The perfor-
mance data of the selected hydrogen production systems are
gathered from the sources mentioned in Table 1 . The results show
that electrical hydrogen production systems have the highest per-
formance (7.60/10), followed by thermal-based systems (6.60/10),
photonic systems (5.40/10), and biological processes (4.80/60). In
012345678910
GHG emissions Land use Water discharge
qualitySolid waste
generationPerformance rankingBiomass Geothermal Hydro Nuclear Solar Wind
Fig. 5. Environmental performance ranking results of the selected hydrogen production sources.C. Acar, I. Dincer / Journal of Cleaner Production 218 (2019) 835 e849 842
addition to electrical hydrogen production systems, the economic
performance evaluations of all selected systems may signi ﬁcantly
be enhanced by lowering the capital cost of renewable-basedhydrogen production systems. Since most of the selected systems
can be integrated with renewable and clean sources, their envi-
ronmental performance appears to be satisfactory. The biological0246810Economic Performance
Environmental Performance
SocialPerformance TechnicalPerformanceReliabilityBiomass
Geotherma l
Hydro
Nuclear
Solar
Wind
Ideal
Fig. 6. Performance comparison results of selected energy sources for hydrogen production.
Table 3
Main advantages and challenges of the selected hydrogen production systems.
System Advantages Challenges
Biological Potentially large resources Slow hydrogen production, large area requirements, research needed to ﬁnd
the most suitable biological organism for optimum production and large-scaleproduction
Electrical Commercial availability, proven technology, well-understood process,
modularity, highly pure production, applicable to small and large scales as well
as stationary and portable needsCompetition with green or renewable electricity
Photonic Environmentally benign process, abundant source, less damage to health, good
efﬁciencies, applicable in small and large scales and can be portable or
stationaryHigh cost, groundbreaking research needed to ﬁnd novel materials for the
effective and affordable caption of solar energy
Thermal Low cost, appropriate for large-scale production, less damage to the
environment, can take advantage of the industrial waste heatComplex process, research is needed to develop corrosion and heat-resistant
materials
012345678910
GHG emissions Land use Water discharge
qualitySolid waste
generationPerformance rankingBiological Electrical Photonic Thermal
Fig. 7. Environmental performance ranking results of the selected hydrogen production systems.C. Acar, I. Dincer / Journal of Cleaner Production 218 (2019) 835 e849 843
hydrogen production systems also have the reliability issue since
controlling and predicting the behavior of biological organisms
may become quite challenging.
Fig. 7 shows that in terms of environmental performance
criteria, including GHG emissions, land use, water discharge qual-
ity, and solid waste generation, thermal hydrogen production op-
tions are seen to be most harmful. However, the thermal hydrogen
production option has the highest social performance. In all envi-
ronmental performance categories, photonic (solar based)
hydrogen production options have the highest performance rank-
ings, therefore, are considered to be the most environmentally
benign options. On the other hand, photonic hydrogen production
has the lowest economic rankings since this technology is
comparatively new and more technological advancements are
needed to lower its initial cost. In terms of economic, technical, and
reliability performances; electrical based hydrogen production
options are the most promising due to well-developed technology
and the long history of water electrolysis. The biological hydrogen
production options are seen as the least preferred options in termsof technical performance and reliability because microorganisms
are seen to be harder to control, regulate, and optimize. Therefore,
it is harder to estimate/quantify the production rate and scale up
hydrogen production via biological options.
InTable 4 , the advantages and challenges of the selected
hydrogen storage systems are listed and compared which are
chemical hydrides, compressed gas, cryogenic liquid, metal hy-
drides, and nanomaterials. The environmental performance
ranking results of the selected hydrogen storage systems are giveninFig. 9 where the environmental bene ﬁts of nanomaterials can
clearly be seen. In Fig. 10 , comparative assessment results of eco-
nomic, environmental, social, and technical performance and reli-
ability of selected storage systems are presented. These results are
gathered from the recent literature provided in Table 2 which show
that among the selected storage options, nanomaterials have the
highest score with 8.40/10 average, followed by chemical and metal
hydrides, with average scores of 6.80/10 and 6.60/10, respectively.
Cryogenic storage options have the lowest average score (3.40/10),
followed by compressed gas (6.00/10). The reason behind the poor
performance of cryogenic liquids are the extreme temperature re-
quirements and associated safety risks which increase their costs as
well. In addition, the loss of hydrogen is very high in this option,
especially compared to the other selected options. In order to
minimize such losses, the cryogenic systems must be highly insu-
lated which also increase the complexity and cost of the storage
option. Therefore, cryogenic storage option has the lowest perfor-
mance rankings in all categories: economic, environmental, social,
technical, and reliability. Similar to the cryogenic option, thecompressed gas has some operational requirements due to high
operating pressures which may bring a safety issue that effects
system cost and social performance as well. Overall, nanomaterials
appear to be a promising option for future hydrogen energy sys-
tems. This is because nanomaterials emit the least amount of
harmful solid, liquid, or gaseous waste; have the highest ef ﬁ-
ciencies with minimal losses; therefore high reliability; and
possible job creations.
In this section, the comparative performance evaluation results0246810Economic Performance
Environmental Performance
SocialPerformance TechnicalPerformanceReliabilityBiological
Electrical
Photonic
Thermal
Ideal
Fig. 8. Performance comparison results of selected hydrogen production systems.
Table 4
Main advantages and challenges of the selected hydrogen storage systems.
Storage option Advantages Challenges
Chemical
hydrideWell understood, reversible reactions and compact
designWaste generation and logistics, infrastructural change needs
Compressed
gasExisting and well-developed technology, availability and
low costVery high pressures needed increasing safety issues and cost, lower storage densities compared
to traditional fuels
Cryogenic
liquidExisting and well-understood technology, higher
densities compared to compressed gasVery low temperatures needed increasing cost, loss of stored hydrogen, energy intensity of the
process, lower densities compared to traditional fuels
Metal hydride Safe and modular operation with wide applicability,
relatively high densitiesRecycling of the storage material and waste issues
Nanomaterials High energy densities At early research and development phase, costs yet to be decreasedC. Acar, I. Dincer / Journal of Cleaner Production 218 (2019) 835 e849 844
of hydrogen production systems and sources and storage systems
are presented and discussed. Here, the aim is to give a broad
perspective on the current status and anticipated future research
directions on hydrogen energy systems. By investigating the eco-
nomic, environmental, social, technical performance and reliability
of the components of hydrogen energy systems, the goal is to
accelerate the transition to hydrogen economy to combat global
warming. When produced, stored, and used in a sustainable
manner, hydrogen could potentially greenize the industrial pro-
cesses, residential applications, and transportation sectors.
6. Future Directions
Developing, constructing, and widely developing hydrogen en-
ergy systems to meet the energy needs require signi ﬁcant in-
vestments and innovative approaches to current energy systems
along the entire hydrogen chain. A well-developed hydrogen chain
has to meet the energy demands in all scales (e.g., small and large
scales) and for all types of needs (e.g., stationary and portable). In
addition, the 3S approach must be followed to develop thishydrogen chain including production, distribution, storage, retail,
fueling infrastructure, and all end-use applications. The key
research needs of the elements of the entire hydrogen energy chain
are presented in Fig. 11 , respectively.
Hydrogen production requires a signi ﬁcant amount of research
to greenize existing hydrogen production systems. Currently,
hydrogen production systems are heavily dependent on fossil fuels
and the critical need is to switch to renewables to make hydrogen
supply truly “carbon free ”. Most of the renewable hydrogen pro-
duction systems have low ef ﬁciencies, high investment costs, or
they are only available in small scale. Therefore, the essential need
is to develop hydrogen production systems that are ef ﬁcient, cost-
effective, and clean which can work off-grid in remote areas as well.
In hydrogen production, use of non-renewable material and energy
sources must be eliminated or minimized. In addition, novel
hydrogen production systems must not have very high and low
temperature or pressure requirements for safety and economic
reasons.
For wide use and high market penetration of hydrogen energy
systems, hydrogen storage systems and hydrogen transportation,
012345678910
GHG emissions Land use Water discharge quality Solid waste generationPerformance rankingChemical hydride Compressed gas Cryogenic liquid Metal hydride Nanomaterials
Fig. 9. Environmental performance ranking results of the selected hydrogen storage systems.
0246810Economic Performance
Environmental Performance
SocialPerformance TechnicalPerformanceReliabilityChemical hydrid e
Compressed gas
Cryogenic liquid
Metal hydride
Nanomaterials
Ideal
Fig. 10. Performance comparison results of selected hydrogen storage systems.C. Acar, I. Dincer / Journal of Cleaner Production 218 (2019) 835 e849 845
and distribution network should be strengthened. The research
needs include enhancing the gravimetric and volumetric densities
of hydrogen storage systems, developing affordable storage optionsat medium temperature and pressure ranges, reducing the charging
and discharging times of storage systems, and identifying the op-
timum strategies for stationary, portable, small, and large-scale
applications. These items are related to sustainable hydrogen
storage. In addition to these needs, recyclability and reuse of
hydrogen storage mediums must be enhanced by increasing the
lifetime of these materials. This can be done by ﬁnding novel ma-
terials which do not have corrosivity and performance degradation
issues and can store hydrogen in small spaces and lighter systems.
It should be noted that these materials are also expected to become
cost competitive with the existing elements in the traditional en-
ergy systems. Hydrogen distribution is essential for broad range
utilization of hydrogen which requires research and development
to modify the existing natural gas pipelines for long distance
hydrogen distribution with minimal losses. Currently, hydrogen is
either transported as compressed gas or cryogenic liquid which are
both expensive and not very ef ﬁcient. Any technological advance-
ments to enhance the performance of hydrogen storage systems
would impact the hydrogen distribution network performance in a
positive manner as well. And last but not least, a well-developed
distribution network with easily accessible fueling stations would
greatly help the wide utilization of hydrogen by all types of end
users. This requires signi ﬁcant cost reduction in hydrogen storage,
transportation, and distribution networks which could lead the
customers to prefer hydrogen energy systems in buildings and in-
dustry as well as in the transportation systems.
The research activities on hydrogen energy systems could
eventually become a fundamental component of the transition
from fossil fuels to clean energy systems to combat global warming.
Hydrogen energy systems are required to have higher ef ﬁciencies
and lower costs at larger scales which can be achieved via contin-
uous improvements in materials science and technology. The cost
of hydrogen energy systems has already been reduced signi ﬁcantly
with the introduction of innovative renewable energy systems anddevelopments in some end-use applications of hydrogen such as
fuel cells. Further cost reduction is needed to lower the cost of
hydrogen production which could be attained by large-scalehydrogen production. The key research directions for wide
deployment of hydrogen in different sectors are presented in
Fig. 12 .
The wide use of hydrogen in the transportation sector depends
on the developments in fuel cell vehicles and hydrogen-fueled in-
ternal combustion engines. In addition, the retail price of hydrogen
has to be competitive with existing transportation fuels. In order to
tackle issues related to global warming, hydrogen must be cleaned,
transported, and stored in a clean, ef ﬁcient, safe, and affordable
manner. The distribution network of hydrogen has to be well-
developed, with adequate fueling stations which are easily acces-
sible by end users. Onboard hydrogen storage systems' perfor-
mance must be enhanced signi ﬁcantly while keeping hydrogen-
fueled vehicles ’cost competitive with conventional vehicles. In
addition, the ef ﬁciency of each item in the hydrogen energy system
should be increased while keeping the safety of hydrogen-powered
vehicles a priority.
The research and development requirements to make hydrogenProduction• Large scale and efficient hydrogen production systems
• Development of novel materials for photonic systems
• Technologies to lower the initial cost of clean hydrogen production systems
• On-site production from locally available sources in a sustainable manner
Storage• High gravimetric and volumetric storage density
• Efficient operation at lower temperatures and pressures
• High power output • Recyclability of the storage materials
• Elimination of very low temperature and pressure requirements
Distribution• Pipeline upgrades to allow large hydrogen networks
• Hydrogen fueling stations
• Minimizing the transportation losses
• Cost efficiency
End use• Efficient and affordable catalysts for fuel cells and internal combustion engines
• Integration of hydrogen into the building heating systems
• Integration of hydrogen into multigeneration systems
• Equipment retrofits to allow hydrogen use
• Enhanced use of hydrogen in the industry as an energy source
Fig. 11. Key research needs of the elements of the entire hydrogen energy chain.
Transportation 
• Clean and 
affordable 
hydrogen
• Well-developed 
fueling network
• Affordable 
hydrogen fueled 
vehicles
• Better storage 
systems
• Safety
• EfficiencyBuilding heating, 
cooling, and power
• Affordable 
hydrogen
• Integration to the 
existing natural gas pipelines
• Long term storage
• Large scale 
storage
• Safety
• EfficiencyIndustry and power 
generation
• Hydrogen from 
clean sources
• Affordable 
hydrogen
• Efficient storage 
and distribution
• Large scale 
systems
• Continiuous 
operation
Fig. 12. Key research directions for wide deployment of hydrogen in different sectors.C. Acar, I. Dincer / Journal of Cleaner Production 218 (2019) 835 e849 846
widely used in buildings are less complex compared to the trans-
portation industry. The ﬁrst step could be integrating hydrogen into
the existing natural gas network in buildings for residential needs
such as cooking, hot water, and heating. The modi ﬁcations required
to make this switch and to eliminate or minimize hydrogen losses
in pipes previously used for natural gas must be completed in the
ﬁrst step. Like the transportation industry, cost-competitive
hydrogen is required by the buildings industry. Again, the
hydrogen used in the buildings must be sustainable with affordable
prices, high ef ﬁciency, low negative impact on the environment,
and safety. The buildings industry require effective long-term and
medium-to-large scale hydrogen storage. Safety and ef ﬁciency are
also key in the buildings industry.
Hydrogen deployment in industrial processes as a fuel and as
industrial feedstock could be achieved in a decentralized manner.
This means, hydrogen can be integrated into the industry plant by
plant and increase its market share gradually. The industrial pro-
cesses and power generation sector require large amounts of
hydrogen in a continuous manner so large scale and effective
hydrogen storage is essential in the industry. The cost of hydrogen
production is expected to be the key determiner during thedeployment of hydrogen in the industry. Wide utilization of
hydrogen in the industry requires hydrogen price to be either equal
to or less than the cost of fossil fuels.
All of the research directions presented here aim to make
hydrogen energy systems available and ready to be applied to all
types of end-user needs. Transition to fully developed hydrogen
energy systems is presented in Fig. 13 . The ﬁrst step is technology
development where research is conducted to meet end-user re-
quirements and establish a commercialization scenario. The second
step is initial market penetration where commercialization of
initial hydrogen energy systems starts in the transportation,
buildings sector, and the industry for both small and large and
stationary and portable needs. The second step is expected to
include prototypes of hydrogen energy systems and the goal is to
enhance their market penetration and performance. In the third
step, investment is required to make hydrogen available for all end-
user types and needs. In the fourth phase, a fully developed
hydrogen market and infrastructure are expected where hydrogen
energy systems are available in all regions for all types of energy
demand. By making clean, affordable, reliable, and safe hydrogen
efﬁciently used for all types of energy requirements from power to
heating and cooling, drying to fresh water production, the depen-
dence on fossil fuels could be eliminated or minimized. The tran-
sition from fossil fuels to renewable hydrogen could play critical
roles in tackling issues related to global warming.7. Conclusions
Hydrogen energy systems are essential components of solutions
towards reducing the negative consequences of global warming.
For a sustainable future, hydrogen should be affordable, reliable,
safe, clean, and ef ﬁcient. For this reason, the aim of this study is to
comparatively evaluate technical, environmental, social, and eco-
nomic performance and reliability of hydrogen by using the 3S
(source-system-service) approach. By selecting the most sustain-
able source for the most sustainable hydrogen production and
storage systems and by enhancing the performance of hydrogen
end-use technologies such as fuel cells and internal combustion
engines, the dominant role of fossil fuels in energy systems could be
eliminated. The main ﬁndings of this study can be summarized as
follows:
/C15In terms of environmental performance, the solar option ap-
pears to be the most advantageous hydrogen production source
with 8/10 ranking and the nuclear has the lowest ranking of 3/
10.
/C15When all economic, environmental, social, technical and reli-
ability criteria are taken into account, on average, the wind has
the highest performance ranking (7.40/10) while the geothermal
has the lowest (4.60/10).
/C15The environmental performance ranking comparison of
hydrogen production systems show that the photonic systems
have the highest ranking (8/10) while the thermal systems have
the lowest (5/10).
/C15Upon considering all performance criteria overall, the electrical
hydrogen production systems are the most advantageous (7.60/
10), and the biological systems have the lowest ranking (4.80/
10).
/C15Among selected hydrogen storage options, the nanomaterials
have the highest ranking of 9/10 in the environmental perfor-
mance category, and the cryogenic liquid has the lowest ranking(3/10)
/C15When all performance criteria are taken into account, the
nanomaterials are the most advantageous hydrogen storage
options (8.40/10) while the cryogenic liquid has the lowest
average overall ranking (3.40/10)
/C15Solar based electrical (such as photoelectrochemical) hydrogen
production accompanied by hydrogen storage with nano-
materials could be the most environmentally benign and sus-
tainable option.
In closing, this study focuses on the sustainability aspects of
hydrogen production sources and systems together with storage
alternatives. In the open literature, there are some studies focusing
on hydrogen production sources or hydrogen production systems
or hydrogen storage options separately. Furthermore, there is a lack
of studies focusing on social, technical, ﬁnancial, and environ-
mental aspects of sources and systems required for sustainable
hydrogen production. By considering the technical, economic,
environmental and social performance assessments of hydrogen
production and storage options together with their reliability, this
study is one of the ﬁrst of its kind, to provide a broader sustain-
ability investigation of hydrogen production and storage together.
In future studies, hydrogen end-use options (such as different fuel
cells and internal combustion engines) could be included in this 3S
approach to even further enhance the sustainability analysis of
hydrogen energy systems for a sustainable future.
References
Acar, C., Dincer, I., 2014. Energy and exergy analyses of a zero emission power plantResearch, innovation and 
commercialziationInfrastructure 
ad market devleopmentCommercially viable 
productsSustianable 
hydrogen 
economy
Fig. 13. Transition steps towards fully developed and the sustainable hydrogen
economy.C. Acar, I. Dincer / Journal of Cleaner Production 218 (2019) 835 e849 847
for coproduction of electricity and methanol. In: Progress in Exergy, Energy, and
the Environment. Springer, pp. 145 e156.
Acar, C., Beskese, A., Temur, G.T., 2018. Sustainability analysis of different hydrogen
production options using hesitant fuzzy AHP. Int. J. Hydrog. Energy 43 (39),
18059 e18076 .
Ahmed, A., Al-Amin, A.Q., Ambrose, A.F., Saidur, R., 2016. Hydrogen fuel and
transport system: a sustainable and environmental future. Int. J. Hydrog. Energy
41 (3), 1369 e1380 .
Alanne, K., Cao, S., 2017. Zero-energy hydrogen economy (ZEH2E) for buildings and
communities including personal mobility. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 71,
697e711.
Aneke, M., Wang, M., 2016. Energy storage technologies and real life applications eA
state of the art review. Appl. Energy 179, 350 e377.
Arteconi, A., Ciarrocchi, E., Pan, Q., Carducci, F., Comodi, G., Polonara, F., Wang, R.,
2017. Thermal energy storage coupled with PV panels for demand side man-
agement of industrial building cooling loads. Appl. Energy 185, 1984 e1993 .
Asghar, A., Raman, A.A.A., Daud, W.M.A.W., 2015. Advanced oxidation processes for
in-situ production of hydrogen peroxide/hydroxyl radical for textile wastewatertreatment: a review. J. Clean. Prod. 87, 826 e838.
Bakenne, A., Nuttall, W., Kazantzis, N., 2016. Sankey-Diagram-based insights into
the hydrogen economy of today. Int. J. Hydrog. Energy 41 (19), 7744 e7753 .
Ball, M., Weeda, M., 2015. The hydrogen economy eVision or reality? Int. J. Hydrog.
Energy 40 (25), 7903 e7919 .
Beheshti, S.M., Ghassemi, H., Shahsavan-Markadeh, R., 2016. An advanced biomass
gasiﬁcation eproton exchange membrane fuel cell system for power generation.
J. Clean. Prod. 112, 995 e1000 .
Bellotti, D., Rivarolo, M., Magistri, L., Massardo, A.F., 2017. Feasibility study of
methanol production plant from hydrogen and captured carbon dioxide. J. CO2
Util. 21, 132 e138.
Bicer, Y., Dincer, I., Zam ﬁrescu, C., Vezina, G., Raso, F., 2016. Comparative life cycle
assessment of various ammonia production methods. J. Clean. Prod. 135,
1379e1395 .
Bundhoo, M.Z., Mohee, R., 2016. Inhibition of dark fermentative bio-hydrogen
production: a review. Int. J. Hydrog. Energy 41 (16), 6713 e6733 .
Chanchetti, L.F., Diaz, S.M.O., Milanez, D.H., Leiva, D.R., de Faria, L.I.L., Ishikawa, T.T.,
2016. Technological forecasting of hydrogen storage materials using patent
indicators. Int. J. Hydrog. Energy 41 (41), 18301 e18310 .
Chintala, V., Subramanian, K.A., 2015. Experimental investigations on effect of
different compression ratios on enhancement of maximum hydrogen energy
share in a compression ignition engine under dual-fuel mode. Energy 87,
448e462.
Choi, B., Panthi, D., Nakoji, M., Kabutomori, T., Tsutsumi, K., Tsutsumi, A., 2015. Novel
hydrogen production and power generation system using metal hydride. Int. J.
Hydrog. Energy 40 (18), 6197 e6206 .
Cipriani, G., Di Dio, V., Genduso, F., La Cascia, D., Liga, R., Miceli, R., Galluzzo, G.R.,
2014. Perspective on hydrogen energy carrier and its automotive applications.
Int. J. Hydrog. Energy 39 (16), 8482 e8494 .
Creutzig, F., Jochem, P., Edelenbosch, O.Y., Mattauch, L., van Vuuren, D.P.,
McCollum, D., Minx, J., 2015. Transport: a roadblock to climate change miti-
gation? Science 350 (6263), 911 e912.
Creutzig, F., 2016. Economic and ecological views on climate change mitigation with
bioenergy and negative emissions. GCB Bioenergy 8 (1), 4 e10.
De Santoli, L., Basso, G.L., Nastasi, B., 2017. The potential of hydrogen enriched
natural gas deriving from power-to-gas option in building energy retro ﬁtting.
Energy Build. 149, 424 e436.
Delmastro, C., Martinsson, F., Mutani, G., Corgnati, S.P., 2017. Modeling building
energy demand pro ﬁles and district heating networks for low carbon urban
areas. Procedia Eng. 198, 386 e397.
Demir, M.E., Dincer, I., 2018. Cost assessment and evaluation of various hydrogen
delivery scenarios. Int. J. Hydrog. Energy 43 (22), 10420 e10430 .
Dincer, I., Acar, C., 2015a. A review on clean energy solutions for better sustain-
ability. Int. J. Energy Res. 39 (5), 585 e606.
Dincer, I., Acar, C., 2015b. Review and evaluation of hydrogen production methods
for better sustainability. Int. J. Hydrog. Energy 40 (34), 11094 e11111 .
Dincer, I., Acar, C., 2016. A review on potential use of hydrogen in aviation appli-
cations. Int. J. Sustain. Aviat. 2 (1), 74 e100.
Dincer, I., Acar, C., 2017. Innovation in hydrogen production. Int. J. Hydrog. Energy 42
(22), 14843 e14864 .
Dodds, P.E., Staffell, I., Hawkes, A.D., Li, F., Grünewald, P., McDowall, W., Ekins, P.,
2015. Hydrogen and fuel cell technologies for heating: a review. Int. J. Hydrog.
Energy 40 (5), 2065 e2083 .
Dutta, S., 2014. A review on production, storage of hydrogen and its utilization as an
energy resource. J. Ind. Eng. Chem. 20 (4), 1148 e1156 .
Fais, B., Sabio, N., Strachan, N., 2016. The critical role of the industrial sector in
reaching long-term emission reduction, energy ef ﬁciency and renewable tar-
gets. Appl. Energy 162, 699 e712.
Frayssinet, L., Merlier, L., Kuznik, F., Hubert, J.L., Milliez, M., Roux, J.J., 2018. Modeling
the heating and cooling energy demand of urban buildings at city scale. Renew.
Sustain. Energy Rev. 81, 2318 e2327 .
Gao, H., Zhen, W., Ma, J., Lu, G., 2017. High ef ﬁcient solar hydrogen generation by
modulation of Co-Ni sul ﬁde (220) surface structure and adjusting adsorption
hydrogen energy. Appl. Catal. B Environ. 206, 353 e363.
Gong, M., Wang, D.Y., Chen, C.C., Hwang, B.J., Dai, H., 2016. A mini review on nickel-
based electrocatalysts for alkaline hydrogen evolution reaction. Nano Res. 9 (1),
28e46.Gonz /C19alez, E.L., Llerena, F.I., P /C19erez, M.S., Iglesias, F.R., Macho, J.G., 2015. Energy
evaluation of a solar hydrogen storage facility: comparison with other electrical
energy storage technologies. Int. J. Hydrog. Energy 40 (15), 5518 e5525 .
G€ollei, A., G €orbe, P., Magyar, A., 2016. Measurement based modeling and simulation
of hydrogen generation cell in complex domestic renewable energy systems.
J. Clean. Prod. 111, 17 e24.
Gradisher, L., Dutcher, B., Fan, M., 2015. Catalytic hydrogen production from fossil
fuels via the water gas shift reaction. Appl. Energy 139, 335 e349.
Hanley, E.S., Deane, J.P., Gallach /C19oir, B./C19O., 2018. The role of hydrogen in low carbon
energy futures eA review of existing perspectives. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev.
82, 3027 e3045 .
Hosseini, S.E., Wahid, M.A., Jamil, M.M., Azli, A.A., Misbah, M.F., 2015. A review on
biomass-based hydrogen production for renewable energy supply. Int. J. EnergyRes. 39 (12), 1597 e1615 .
Hosseini, S.E., Wahid, M.A., 2016. Hydrogen production from renewable and sus-
tainable energy resources: promising green energy carrier for clean develop-
ment. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 57, 850 e866.
Joshi, A.S., Dincer, I., Reddy, B.V., 2016. Effects of various parameters on energy and
exergy ef ﬁciencies of a solar thermal hydrogen production system. Int. J.
Hydrog. Energy 41 (19), 7997 e8007 .
Kalinci, Y., Hepbasli, A., Dincer, I., 2015. Techno-economic analysis of a stand-alone
hybrid renewable energy system with hydrogen production and storage op-
tions. Int. J. Hydrog. Energy 40 (24), 7652 e7664 .
Karakaya, E., Nuur, C., Assbring, L., 2018. Potential transitions in the iron and steel
industry in Sweden: towards a hydrogen-based future? J. Clean. Prod. 195,
651e663.
Khani, L., Mahmoudi, S.M.S., Chitsaz, A., Rosen, M.A., 2016. Energy and exer-
goeconomic evaluation of a new power/cooling cogeneration system based on a
solid oxide fuel cell. Energy 94, 64 e77.
Kuntke, P., Rodríguez Arredondo, M., Widyakristi, L., ter Heijne, A., Sleutels, T.H.,
Hamelers, H.V., Buisman, C.J., 2017. Hydrogen gas recycling for energy ef ﬁcient
ammonia recovery in electrochemical systems. Environ. Sci. Technol. 51 (5),
3110e3116 .
Liu, C., Liu, P., 2015. Mechanistic study of methanol synthesis from CO
2and H 2on a
modi ﬁed model Mo 6S8cluster. ACS Catal. 5 (2), 1004 e1012 .
Liu, J., Xia, W., Mu, W., Li, P., Zhao, Y., Zou, R., 2015. New challenge of metal eorganic
frameworks for high-ef ﬁcient separation of hydrogen chloride toward clean
hydrogen energy. J. Mater. Chem. 3 (10), 5275 e5279 .
Liu, J., Liu, G., Gu, C., Liu, W., Xu, J., Li, B., Wang, W., 2016. Rational synthesis of a
novel 3, 3, 5-c polyhedral metal eorganic framework with high thermal stability
and hydrogen storage capability. J. Mater. Chem. 4 (30), 11630 e11634 .
Maleki, A., Pourfayaz, F., Ahmadi, M.H., 2016. Design of a cost-effective wind/
photovoltaic/hydrogen energy system for supplying a desalination unit by a
heuristic approach. Sol. Energy 139, 666 e675.
Maleki, A., Hafeznia, H., Rosen, M.A., Pourfayaz, F., 2017. Optimization of a grid-
connected hybrid solar-wind-hydrogen CHP system for residential applica-
tions by ef ﬁcient metaheuristic approaches. Appl. Therm. Eng. 123, 1263 e1277 .
Maniatopoulos, P., Andrews, J., Shabani, B., 2015. Towards a sustainable strategy for
road transportation in Australia: the potential contribution of hydrogen. Renew.
Sustain. Energy Rev. 52, 24 e34.
Marchenko, O.V., Solomin, S.V., 2015. The future energy: hydrogen versus elec-
tricity. Int. J. Hydrog. Energy 40 (10), 3801 e3805 .
Maroufmashat, A., Fowler, M., Khavas, S.S., Elkamel, A., Roshandel, R.,
Hajimiragha, A., 2016. Mixed integer linear programing based approach foroptimal planning and operation of a smart urban energy network to support
the hydrogen economy. Int. J. Hydrog. Energy 41 (19), 7700 e7716 .
Mehrpooya, M., Sayyad, S., Zonouz, M.J., 2017. Energy, exergy and sensitivity ana-
lyses of a hybrid combined cooling, heating and power (CCHP) plant with
molten carbonate fuel cell (MCFC) and Stirling engine. J. Clean. Prod. 148,283e294.
Moliner, R., L /C19azaro, M.J., Suelves, I., 2016. Analysis of the strategies for bridging the
gap towards the hydrogen economy. Int. J. Hydrog. Energy 41 (43),
19500 e19508 .
Mostafaeipour, A., Khayyami, M., Sedaghat, A., Mohammadi, K., Shamshirband, S.,
Sehati, M.A., Gorakifard, E., 2016. Evaluating the wind energy potential for
hydrogen production: a case study. Int. J. Hydrog. Energy 41 (15), 6200 e6210 .
Nagpal, M., Kakkar, R., 2018. An evolving energy solution: intermediate hydrogen
storage. Int. J. Hydrog. Energy 43, 12168 e12188 .
Nakamura, A., Ota, Y., Koike, K., Hidaka, Y., Nishioka, K., Sugiyama, M., Fujii, K., 2015.
A 24.4% solar to hydrogen energy conversion ef ﬁciency by combining concen-
trator photovoltaic modules and electrochemical cells. APEX 8 (10), 107101 .
Nastasi, B., Basso, G.L., 2016. Hydrogen to link heat and electricity in the transition
towards future smart energy systems. Energy 110, 5 e22.
Nastasi, B., Di Matteo, U., 2017. Innovative use of Hydrogen in energy retro ﬁtting of
listed buildings. Energy Procedia 111, 435 e441.
Niaz, S., Manzoor, T., Pandith, A.H., 2015. Hydrogen storage: materials, methods and
perspectives. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 50, 457 e469.
Nikolaidis, P., Poullikkas, A., 2017. A comparative overview of hydrogen production
processes. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 67, 597 e611.
Ogden, J., Jaffe, A.M., Scheitrum, D., McDonald, Z., Miller, M., 2018. Natural gas as a
bridge to hydrogen transportation fuel: insights from the literature. Energy
Policy 115, 317 e329.
Otto, A., Robinius, M., Grube, T., Schiebahn, S., Praktiknjo, A., Stolten, D., 2017. Po-
wer-to-steel: reducing CO 2through the integration of renewable energy and
hydrogen into the German steel industry. Energies 10 (4), 451 .C. Acar, I. Dincer / Journal of Cleaner Production 218 (2019) 835 e849 848
Owierkowicz, D., Malinowska, M., 2017. The future of the fuel in the marine in-
dustry. World Sci. News 76, 136 e148.
Prananto, L.A., Biddinika, M.K., Aziz, M., 2017. Combined dehydrogenation and
hydrogen-based power generation. Energy Procedia 142, 1603 e1608 .
Rao, M., Fernandes, A., Pronk, P., Aravind, P.V., 2019. Design, modelling and techno-
economic analysis of a solid oxide fuel cell-gas turbine system with CO 2capture
fueled by gases from steel industry. Appl. Therm. Eng. 148, 1258 e1270 .
Reinhart, C.F., Davila, C.C., 2016. Urban building energy modeling eA review of a
nascent ﬁeld. Build. Environ. 97, 196 e202.
Ren, J., Musyoka, N.M., Langmi, H.W., Mathe, M., Liao, S., 2017. Current research
trends and perspectives on materials-based hydrogen storage solutions: a
critical review. Int. J. Hydrog. Energy 42 (1), 289 e311.
Reuß, M., Grube, T., Robinius, M., Preuster, P., Wasserscheid, P., Stolten, D., 2017.
Seasonal storage and alternative carriers: a ﬂexible hydrogen supply chain
model. Appl. Energy 200, 290 e302.
Salvi, B.L., Subramanian, K.A., 2015. Sustainable development of road transportation
sector using hydrogen energy system. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 51,
1132e1155 .
Sarrias-Mena, R., Fern /C19andez-Ramírez, L.M., García-V /C19azquez, C.A., Jurado, F., 2015.
Electrolyzer models for hydrogen production from wind energy systems. Int. J.
Hydrog. Energy 40 (7), 2927 e2938 .
Schandl, H., Hat ﬁeld-Dodds, S., Wiedmann, T., Geschke, A., Cai, Y., West, J.,
Newth, D., Baynes, T., Lenzen, M., Owen, A., 2016. Decoupling global environ-mental pressure and economic growth: scenarios for energy use, materials use
and carbon emissions. J. Clean. Prod. 132, 45 e56.
Schulze, M., Nehler, H., Ottosson, M., Thollander, P., 2016. Energy management in
industry ea systematic review of previous ﬁndings and an integrative concep-
tual framework. J. Clean. Prod. 112, 3692 e3708 .
Sethia, G., Sayari, A., 2016. Activated carbon with optimum pore size distribution for
hydrogen storage. Carbon 99, 289 e294.
Setoyama, T., Takewaki, T., Domen, K., Tatsumi, T., 2017. The challenges of solar
hydrogen in chemical industry: how to provide, and how to apply? Faraday
Discuss 198, 509 e527.
Sgobbi, A., Nijs, W., De Miglio, R., Chiodi, A., Gargiulo, M., Thiel, C., 2016. How far
away is hydrogen? Its role in the medium and long-term decarbonisation of theEuropean energy system. Int. J. Hydrog. Energy 41 (1), 19 e35.
Shaﬁei, E., Davidsdottir, B., Leaver, J., Stefansson, H., Asgeirsson, E.I., 2015.
Comparative analysis of hydrogen, biofuels and electricity transitional path-
ways to sustainable transport in a renewable-based energy system. Energy 83,
614e627.
Shaﬁei, E., Davidsdottir, B., Leaver, J., Stefansson, H., Asgeirsson, E.I., 2017. Energy,
economic, and mitigation cost implications of transition toward a carbon-neutral transport sector: a simulation-based comparison between hydrogen
and electricity. J. Clean. Prod. 141, 237 e247.
Shaner, M.R., Atwater, H.A., Lewis, N.S., McFarland, E.W., 2016. A comparativetechnoeconomic analysis of renewable hydrogen production using solar energy.
Energy Environ. Sci. 9 (7), 2354 e2371 .
Sharma, S., Ghoshal, S.K., 2015. Hydrogen the future transportation fuel: from
production to applications. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 43, 1151 e1158 .
Simon, J., Ferriz, A.M., Correas, L.C., 2015. HyUnder ehydrogen underground storage
at large scale: case study Spain. Energy Procedia 73, 136 e144.
Singh, S., Jain, S., Venkateswaran, P.S., Tiwari, A.K., Nouni, M.R., Pandey, J.K., Goel, S.,
2015. Hydrogen: a sustainable fuel for future of the transport sector. Renew.
Sustain. Energy Rev. 51, 623 e633.
Singh, A.K., Singh, S., Kumar, A., 2016. Hydrogen energy future with formic acid: a
renewable chemical hydrogen storage system. Catal. Sci. Technol. 6 (1), 12 e40.
Sinigaglia, T., Lewiski, F., Martins, M.E.S., Siluk, J.C.M., 2017. Production, storage, fuel
stations of hydrogen and its utilization in automotive applications-a review. Int.J. Hydrog. Energy 42 (39), 24597 e24611 .
Siyal, S.H., Mentis, D., M €ortberg, U., Samo, S.R., Howells, M., 2015. A preliminary
assessment of wind generated hydrogen production potential to reduce the
gasoline fuel used in road transport sector of Sweden. Int. J. Hydrog. Energy 40
(20), 6501 e6511 .
Sorrell, S., 2015. Reducing energy demand: a review of issues, challenges and ap-
proaches. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 47, 74 e82.
Speight, J.G., 2016. Hydrogen in re ﬁneries. Hydrogen Sci. Eng. Mater. Process. Syst.
Technol. 1 e18.
Uyar, T.S., Besikci, D., 2017. Integration of hydrogen energy systems into renewable
energy systems for better design of 100% renewable energy communities. Int. J.
Hydrog. Energy 42 (4), 2453 e2456 .
Valente, A., Iribarren, D., Dufour, J., 2018. Harmonizing the cumulative energy de-
mand of renewable hydrogen for robust comparative life-cycle studies. J. Clean.
Prod. 175, 384 e393.
Van Fan, Y., Perry, S., Kleme /C20s, J.J., Lee, C.T., 2018. A review on air emissions assess-
ment: transportation. J. Clean. Prod. 194, 673 e684.
Walker, S.B., Mukherjee, U., Fowler, M., Elkamel, A., 2016. Benchmarking and se-
lection of Power-to-Gas utilizing electrolytic hydrogen as an energy storage
alternative. Int. J. Hydrog. Energy 41 (19), 7717 e7731 .
Wong, P.S., Lindsay, A., Crameri, L., Holdsworth, S., 2015. Can energy ef ﬁciency
rating and carbon accounting foster greener building design decision? Anempirical study. Build. Environ. 87, 255 e264.
Yarbrough, I., Sun, Q., Reeves, D.C., Hackman, K., Bennett, R., Henshel, D.S., 2015.
Visualizing building energy demand for building peak energy analysis. Energy
Build. 91, 10 e15.
Yilmaz, F., Balta, M.T., Selbas ¸ , R., 2016. A review of solar based hydrogen production
methods. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 56, 171 e178.
Zhang, Y.H., Jia, Z.C., Yuan, Z.M., Yang, T., Qi, Y., Zhao, D.L., 2015. Development and
application of hydrogen storage. J. Iron Steel Res. Int. 22 (9), 757 e770.
Zhang, F., Zhao, P., Niu, M., Maddy, J., 2016. The survey of key technologies in
hydrogen energy storage. Int. J. Hydrog. Energy 41 (33), 14535 e
14552 .C. Acar, I. Dincer / Journal of Cleaner Production 218 (2019) 835 e849 849
