Sustainability Assessment of Hydrogen Energy PathwaysMcLellan, Mr, Ben (Presenter), Dicks, Dr, Andrew and Diniz da Costa, Dr, JoãoAustralian Research Council Centre for Functional Nanomaterials,Chemical Engineering Division, School of Engineering, The University of QueenslandSt Lucia, QLD 4072, Australia.Phone: +61 7 3346 1407Fax: +61 7 3365 1499b.mclellan@uq.edu.auIntended Category: Sustainability Science / Tools for managing sustainabilityAbstractHydrogen is widely seen as the solution to the current problems of Global Warmingand poor urban air quality.  Much research and funding is being invested in thedevelopment of a “Hydrogen Economy”, using hydrogen as an energy carrier forvehicles and stationary electricity production.  There are a wide variety of sources forhydrogen – ranging from fossil fuels to solar electrolysis – and various options fortransport and utilisation.  However, the most appropriate pathway to producing andutilising hydrogen is yet to be determined, and the number of variables anduncertainty involved makes prediction difficult.  This paper outlines the methodologyfor, and some preliminary findings of, the Life Cycle sustainability assessment ofHydrogen Energy Pathways, specifically in the Australian context.  In particular, itfocuses on the sustainability metrics of various hydrogen production pathways, bytaking into consideration the environmental burden of pollution upon the receivingenvironment. This study provides an insight into the potential effects, and hydrogenproduction technologies that may eventually lead to a more sustainable energypathway.IntroductionThe current environmental problems of global warming and local human healtheffects of pollution have been the impetus for extensive research and development ofalternate energy technologies.  Hydrogen is being widely examined as one potentialmethod of reducing anthropogenic greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, but the path to ahydrogen economy is far from certain.  A variety of pathways exist for the productionof hydrogen – from reformation or gasification of fossil fuels to the electrolysis ofwater using renewable energy sources.  Many utilisation technologies also exist forboth stationary and mobile applications, although most focus has been on the potentialfor use in fuel cells.These utilisation and production pathways combine to give a large range of optionsfor the overall life cycle, and equally large possibilities for differences in impacts.The optimum path to hydrogen, and its subsequent utilisation will vary from locationto location according to local conditions of fuel availability and cost among otherfactors.  There is a need for the establishment of a method of assessing the differentoptions available in terms of potential and specific local impacts of the whole lifecycle based on the three pillars of sustainability (social, economic, environmental).
This paper presents the concept of sustainability metrics as one possible assessmentmethod, and gives a short example of their use.Life Cycles for HydrogenThis section gives a brief description of the general life cycle stages for hydrogenproduction and utilisation.  Figure 1 shows a general representation of the main lifecycle stages for the production and utilisation of hydrogen.  As there are such a widevariety of feedstocks and processing methods, the combinations give a large numberof pathways, all of which should be analysed to determine the most economically,socially and environmentally beneficial.Figure 1: General Hydrogen  Life Cycle
Notes: Section 1 is typically conducted within the same plant, but may be separate depending oneconomic and environmental factorsCarbon capture and storage is yet to be proved feasible, but should be examined as an optionExtractionThe feedstock for hydrogen production must be mined, harvested or collected to acentral point for the production process.  Extraction location depends on the sourceavailability, and thus the opportunity for alternatives may be limited.  The locationtends to be separated by significant distance from the point of end usage, which hasboth advantages and disadvantages in terms of sustainability.  Major impacts at thepoint of extraction include fugitive hydrocarbon emissions, change in land use,emissions from onsite equipment, change in amenity, local employment andconsumption.  The most tangible of these impacts is the impact of emissions, whichmay be calculated or estimated from industrial data.ProductionHydrogen can be produced from a variety of feedstocks via various routes (see Figure2).  Currently the most common methods are Steam Reforming of natural gas (NG)and gasification of coal, typically for the ammonia and petroleum industries [1].  Theproduction site impacts will be much the same as for extraction, although this stagehas much more room for flexibility in location of the plant.  Again, the focus for thisTransportH2ProductionPurificationCO2 Transport /SequestrationCO2CaptureH2 Transport /StorageH2 SourceProduction12
paper will be on emissions, but further work should include the less readilyquantifiable categories of land use, local employment and health.Figure 2: Hydrogen Production Pathways
UtilisationThe utilisation technology that is most commonly associated with hydrogenapplications is the fuel cell.  A variety of different types of fuel cells are available,each of which has different purity constraints and suitability for different applications.The high temperature Molten Carbonate and Solid Oxide fuel cells tend to be moreresistant to catalyst poisoning by CO and CO2, but are still susceptible to sulphurpoisoning.TransportThere are a number of transport stages within the overall hydrogen life cycle whichneed to be examined and compared in terms of the triple bottom line.  Firstly, thetransport of feedstock to the hydrogen production plant.  Typically modern coalpower stations are built at or near the site of fuel extraction, but this may not be thebest method in terms of hydrogen production, as cost of transportation of hydrogen orcoal, environmental and human health impacts of the plant location must be analysedand compared.    Secondly, the transport of processed syngas or hydrogen from theproduction plant to the end usage point.  Thirdly, potential transport of carbon dioxideand other by-products to storage sites.Extensive networks of pipelines, road and rail links exist for the transport of fossilfuels for trade and domestic electricity production.   Further analysis must examineFossilFossilFuelsFuelsRenewablRenewablesesCoal, Oil,Coal, Oil,NaturalNaturalGasGasBiomasBiomasssSolar, Tidal,Solar, Tidal,Wave, Hydro,Wave, Hydro,Wind,Wind,GeothermalGeothermalChemicaChemicallElectrolyElectrolysissisBiologicBiologicalalProcessProcessesesH2GasificatioGasification/n/ReformingReforming
ChemicalChemicalProcesseProcessess
whether the production of hydrogen would be best at source or closer to the point ofend use.  It may be possible to use existing NG transmission pipelines to transporthydrogen or hydrogen / NG blends however, this would depend strongly on the abilityof current pipeline materials to withstand hydrogen embrittlement [2], and havesufficient integrity to minimise leakage.Existing infrastructure for the transport of feedstock would suggest that it may bemost economically efficient to bring the feedstock to the processing location, whichwould be closer to the end user.  This would eliminate some of the capital costs ofhydrogen pipelines, which are around twice the cost of NG pipelines [2].  Whetherthis would be the most environmentally beneficial method is yet to be seen.StorageStorage of hydrogen is problematic due to the small size of the molecules, whichmake losses easy and liquefaction difficult.  The main methods of storage are as aliquid or compressed gas, but metal hydrides are being examined as a chemicalstorage alternative.  The adsorption of hydrogen onto carbon nano-materials has alsobeen extensively researched, but is yet to prove viable.  Some methods of storage willproduce emissions of sorbent materials, and all will be likely to have fugitivehydrogen emissions which may have effects on ozone depletion.Carbon Capture and StorageFor the ultimate reduction of GHG emissions, it is essential to remove CO2.  Althoughit is yet to be proven viable, the capture of CO2 and storage underground in geologicalstructures, unminable coal seams or exhausted oil and gas wells, or in the deep ocean,are some of the proposed methods.  These processes cannot be relied on for thepresent, and will not be examined further in this paper.Sustainability MetricsWith all the possibilities of production, utilisation, transport and carbon storageprocesses, there are a wide variety of pathways available for the hydrogen life cycle.The challenge then, is to assess these in terms of the sustainability of their impactsusing a triple bottom line approach.  This paper focuses on environmental assessment,but this approach can be extended to include the other two pillars of sustainability –the economic and social aspects.The method of sustainability metrics has been demonstrated recently as a possiblemethod of comparison of different process options.  The Institution of ChemicalEngineers (IChemE) has released a recommended procedure for measuringsustainable development progress [3].  This method is similar to life cycle analysis(LCA) methods which determine overall emissions, resource usage and economicindicators per unit of product or value added.  This allows a process to be monitoredfor sustainability improvements, or to compare different process options, but does notinclude specific local parameters.  This lack of specificity may reduce the potential ofthis technique to assess different locality options.  Advances made on this techniqueby Diniz da Costa and Pagan [4] as followed in this paper, go some way towards
addressing this problem, but still retain some limitations due to the lack of temporaland spatial factors.The first step in the sustainability metrics method, as mandated by IChemE, is thecalculation of the environmental burden caused by a substance on the receivingenvironment via Equation 1, below:Equation 1EBi = _(WN)(PFi,N)Where:EBi = ith environmental burdenWN = weight of substance N emitted, including accidental and unintentional emissionsPFi,N = potency factor of substance N for the ith environmental burden(IChemE and the National Pollutant Inventory have PF lists.)The IChemE method ends here, whereas Diniz da Costa and Pagan continue by nextcalculating the Potential Environmental Impact (PEI). In this paper, the PEI wasderived by calculating the EB and normalizing by dividing the total mass load emittedper year by the total amount of hydrogen exported per year.  The PEI indicates apotential for environmental impact rather than an actual environmental impact, and isdetermined as follows:Equation 2()exnniiHEBEBEBPEI+++Σ===...211Where:PEI = Potential environmental impact for the main emission substancesHex = Total hydrogen exported (GJ)Diniz da Costa and Pagan [4] indicate that the PEI can be viewed as a technologyindicator, as it gives an overall assessment of the performance of plants relative to oneanother.  However, it still does not take the local environment into account, therebyeffectively classing all environments as the same.  To overcome this, they developSpecific Environmental Impacts (SEI).SEI indicators are developed to determine whether the emissions upon a receivingenvironment can cause an impact or not.  If the environment has the ability to treatand buffer the emissions, then impacts are not considered significant (and may beassigned a value of 0).  One example they use is that if there is no rain or if soils arealkaline, then emissions relating to acidification impacts on soil and water may notbreach the carrying capacity of the local ecosystem.  The approach to determine theSEI is derived from PEI as formulated below:
Equation 3SEI = _(SEB1 + SEB2 + …+ SEBn) / HexSpecific Environmental Burdens (SEB) are initially derived from a linear relationshipof single or multiple dimensionless average parameters as shown below:Equation 4()iiiKEBSEB=Where:K = specific environmental dose valueEquation 5++++++Σ===highnnnnnnnKαααααα......21211Where:_ = dimensionless parametern = number of parametersThis approach provides a set of values normalized using the highest value of K of theplants being examined (or a base case plant).  This solves the problem that ariseswhen (as is typical with environmental parameters), there are values varying overseveral orders of magnitude.To use specific sustainability indicators, it is necessary to have data relating to thespecific location of a plant or process.  Where an impact is global in nature (such asemissions of greenhouse gases), the specific impact may be assumed to be equal tothe potential impact.Test CaseAn example of the use of this method is described here, using the production of 67.85t H2 / d or 9581 GJ/d (the equivalent to provide fuel for 5000 fuel cell buses and100,000 fuel cell cars, based on the average Australian driving patterns and the workof Ogden, et al. [5]).  The two cases compared are production using NG or coal at thepoint of production for theoretical supply to Brisbane.  Only extraction, sourcetransport and hydrogen production emissions are considered here, due to the limits oftime and data availability.Table 1: Hypothetical Test Case Data
FeedstockCoalCoalNGNGProcessGasification(IGCC)Gasification(IGCC)SteamReformingSteamReformingLocation#1#2#3#4Distance fromSourceOnsite(3km)200kmOnsite (3km)450kmTransport TypeRailRailPipelinePipelineMean AnnualDays of Rain92669553Average soil pH5.87.35.76.4Population within20km10752749558125749Transport distances in this case are based on typical distances from operating gasfields / coal mines to major centres [6].  Overall emissions due to transport werecalculated using estimates of per tonne kilometre emissions based on a recentEuropean study by Edwards, et al. [7] and Queensland Rail’s report on road / railemissions [8].  The emissions data that was utilised in the sustainability metrics wascalculated using literature average values. Some emissions were not available due tocommercial confidentiality, but estimates will be made during further work.In the case of Global Warming Potential, the function f(_) giving the specificenvironmental dose value, K, is assumed equal to the PEI, as global warming is aworld wide issue, so the specific impact of emissions is equivalent to the potentialimpact.  For Acidification, f(_) is given as the average of two factors – one relating tomean annual days of rain and the other to soil pH.  But where there is no rain, or thesoil is alkaline (and thus may have the ability to buffer the effects of acid rain), the Kvalue is 0.Rain factor:Equation 6_rain = frain / 365Where frain is the mean annual days of rain.Soil factor:Equation 7−=71pHpHsoilsoilαAccording to the IChemE [3] NOx may be given a weighting of 0.7 as compared toSOx (as SO2) which are given a weighting of 1.  The combined sum of these weightedemissions is then multiplied by the K value to give the specific impact.The factor for human health effects of particles less than 10µm in size (PM10) dependson population within certain distances of the plant.  Particulate matter tends to settle
within 20km of the emission point, For the purposes of this study, it has beenestimated that the impact of PM10 is focussed within the first 20km of a plant, with thepopulation outside that radius receiving only minimal impact.Equation 8f (_pop) = P20kmwhere P20km is the population within a 20km radius.ResultsThree major impacts were analysed in the test case – Global Warming, AtmosphericAcidification and Human Health effects of small particles.  Analysis was completedon each individual stage of the life-cycle, however it is possible to make thecomparison between stages depending on the desired outcome.  The effect of usingthe specific environmental impact approach is to reduce the effect of the smallerimpacts further – thus spreading the values over a wider range.  This implies that thehigher emitters of CO2 per GJ H2 are penalised further in terms of the measure of theirsustainability, whilst the lower emitters have enhanced performance.Figures 3 and 4 show the outcome of the global warming impact resultant from CO2emissions related to hydrogen production and transportation components. It isobserved that large impacts are allocated to production while transportation results inimpacts of two order magnitude lower.Figure 3: H2 Production Impacts on Global Warming
Figure 4: Impacts of Feedstock Transport and Extraction Emissions on Global Warming
 
Acidification impacts take into account the local soil and weather conditions and theresults are depicted in Figures 5 and 6. It is assumed that where there is soil of pHgreater than 7, the environment has some capacity to buffer the impact of acidcompounds, and thus no impact is recorded.  Thus the only impact that is unusual issituation #2, which is lower than all others due to high soil pH.  This is perhaps thebest example of where the specific sustainability impact is important, as it brings localconditions into account.Figure 5: Impacts of Hydrogen Production Emissions on Atmospheric Acidification

Figure 6: Impact of Feedstock Transport Emissions on Atmospheric Acidification
Figure 7 shows the impact of PM10 emissions on human heath. The impact ofparticulates was expected to be high in areas of higher population density, and itproved to be so.  The important point here is the comparison of situation #1 and #4.Typically it would be expected that a natural gas plant would be better than IGCC, butdue to population density, it would actually have less of a health impact to build plant#1 rather than plant #4.Figure 7: Impact of Hydrogen Production PM10 Emissions on Human Health
Tables 2 and 3 summarize the sustainability metric results for the hydrogenproduction and transportation components for the considered impacts in this study:global warming, acidification and human health.  Global warming far exceeds theother impacts by four to five orders of magnitude.
Table 2: Summary of Results - Hydrogen Production ImpactsGlobal WarmingAcidificationHuman HealthSituationPEISEIPEISEIPEISEI#1135.3135.30.02910.0270.19250.0008#2135.3135.30.029100.19250.1925#378.545.60.00750.00750.0640.0002#478.545.60.00750.00390.0640.001Table 3: Summary of Results - Feedstock Transport and Extraction ImpactsTransportGlobal WarmingAcidificationSituationPEISEIPEISEI#15x10-61x10-80.00010.00009#20.00047x10-50.0070#30.000022x10-76x10-76x10-7#40.0020.0020.000040.00002In order to demonstrate the use of sustainability metrics in terms of comparingdifferent life cycle stage impacts, Table 4 shows the results of such an analysis.Table 4: Specific Environmental Impacts for Global Warming - Comparison of LC stagesExtractionTransportProduction#16.95E-071.85E-13135.3#26.95E-071.18E-09135.3#32.15E-085.09E-1278.53#42.15E-086.74E-0878.53DiscussionAs mentioned briefly above, the results were in line with expectations in the majorityof cases.  Due to the assumption here that the climatic conditions were approximatelyequal across the entire life cycle regardless of distance, the SEI becomes the PEI forthe comparison of different life-cycle stages apart from Global Warming Impacts,which are shown in Table 4.  It is apparent that the impact of transport emissionstends to be the least, except for long distance natural gas pipelines, where the impactsovertake extraction emissions. The global warming impacts are as expected, withlonger distance transport, coal extraction and IGCC having higher impacts.  Largedifferences in order of magnitude are observed due to the method utilised, whichextends the difference between low and high emissions.  This may be useful inencouraging the lowering of emissions, but can also be misleading at first glance, as itshows a much lower impact on Global Warming than actually exists.  It may be moreappropriate to leave the K factor as 1 in this case, as PEI can be assumed equal to theSEI with such a global-scaled impact.The Atmospheric Acidification and Human Health impacts give a good indication ofthe amount of data required to utilise these sustainability metrics.  Data such asaverage rainfall for specific areas, average soil pH and local population within certaindistances of the emissions source can be expensive to acquire - both in monetary andExtractionGlobal WarmingSituationPEISEI#10.010.01#20.010.01#30.0010.0001#40.0010.0001
time costs.  Complicating matters is the distance over which the life cycle stages arespread, which may not allow the assumption of constant conditions to be justified.The method of assuming specific impacts to be zero where soil is alkaline or there isno rainfall, raises the possibility of a more highly emitting plant being ranked as moresustainable than a lower emitting plant depending on local conditions.  This is shownin the test case, where the SEI of situation #2 was less than all other situations, incontrast to the PEI that was higher than most.  Ultimately there must be some impactfrom any emission, but it is reasonable to assume that the buffering capacity ofalkaline soil could lessen the impact significantly.It is apparent that there are a number of aspects of this methodology that can beimproved.  The functions f(α) could be examined and refined further in the light ofenvironmental data.  Also, although this method attempts to include localenvironments, it does not include temporal or spatial factors, hence allowing only ageneral “whole-of-air-shed” approach.One of the major challenges in utilising this method is the possibility of having thelife cycle stages spread out over a large distance, thus allowing for great variability inlocal conditions, and requiring further calculations.  For instance, the emissions ofparticulates from transport were not included here, as the data requirements wouldrequire section by section (kilometre by kilometre or point by point) analysis.  Thismeans that it makes little sense to add the total life cycle emissions prior to analysis,unless it can be reasonably assumed that the conditions are constant throughout thearea analysed – a dubious assumption in the case of human health and acidificationeffects.  Also, some emissions are not included or the location cannot be specified, forexample the NOx and SOx emissions from offsite electricity production.This approach is a comparative method, which can be used variously to assess theimpact of different technologies, locations or performance of a plant over time.  Bycomparing different technologies, we may find the best option for a certain location,or alternately we can try to find the best location for a technology to have the leastimpact.  We could also monitor a plant on a regular basis to determine whether it isbeing made more or less sustainable.  The approach taken here has been to comparethe different options among themselves, however it may be preferred to compare toeither an ideal or a worst acceptable case example.  Or alternatively, comparisoncould be based on current or projected legislative requirements for power generationemissions.  This would offer the benefit of a universal yardstick, but could bepractically very difficult to derive and implement in order to take the specific localimpacts into account.The measurement of a baseline for environmental factors (from which a deviation canbe measured) is often difficult due to diurnal and seasonal variations, and the fact thatmost environments have already been affected by human activity.  Also, estimatingthe assimilative capacity of the environment could be exceptionally difficult, as theeffects of incremental changes in ambient levels of emissions may not be obvious.Ultimately, the goal of zero emissions could be the benchmark for improvement of aplant, but it does not give an indication of whether a non-zero emissions plant issustainable or not.
The great advantage of this method is the inclusion of local factors, which can changethe level of impacts significantly.  This should allow a more reasonable estimate ofsustainability.ConclusionsThis work shows an initial application of sustainability metrics to the life cycle ofhydrogen which has been demonstrated in a test case.  The method utilised has manyareas that merit further development, in particular to take into account temporal andspatial variations of emissions over air sheds. The results show that global warmingwill continue to be a major issue of environmental concern for a hydrogen economyreliant on fossil fuels. Although it is expected that much lower emissions will beproduced at the user end (i.e. fuel cell cars), CO2 emissions from hydrogenproduction exceed by several order magnitudes acidification and human healthimpacts.  The global warming impacts are higher with longer distance transport, coalextraction and IGCC.  Large differences in order of magnitude are observed due to themethod utilised, which extends the difference between low and high emissions.  Thismay be useful in encouraging the lowering of emissions, but can also be misleading atfirst glance, as it shows a much lower impact on Global Warming than actually exists.References1.Geiger, S., Automotive Hydrogen Infrastructure - On the way to a HydrogenEconomy, 2003, www.fuelcelltoday.com2.Ogden, J.M., Prospects for Building a Hydrogen Energy Infrastructure. Annu.Rev. Energy Environ., 1999. 24: p. 227-79.3.Tallis, B., et al., The Sustainability Metrics. 2003, IChemE: Rugby, UK.4.Diniz da Costa, J.C. and R.J. Pagan, Sustainability Metrics for Coal PowerGeneration in Australia. 2003.5.Ogden, J.M., M.M. Steinbugler, and T.G. Kreutz, A comparison of hydrogen,methanol and gasoline as fuels for fuel cell vehicles: implications for vehicledesign and infrastructure development. Journal of Power Sources, 1999.79(2): p. 143-168.6.Encom, Australia's Natural Gas Transmission Pipelines, September 2000.2000, AGA: Canberra.7.Edwards, R., et al., Well-to-Wheels Analysis of Future Automotive Fuels andPowertrains in the European Context. 2004, EUCAR, Concawe, EuropeanCommission Directorate General Joint Research Centre.8.Affleck, F., Comparison of Greenhouse Gas Emissions by AustralianIntermodal Rail and Road Transport. 2002, QR Network Access: Brisbane.9.Padro, C.E.G. and V. Putsche, Survey of the Economics of HydrogenTechnologies. 1999, National Renewable Energy Laboratory: Golden,Colorado.
